
# Tutorial 2

## Question 1

1. Obtain the summary statistic and histogram of GDPPC. Discuss what you can learn from the histogram and summary statistics. If you had a different set of 26 countries with GDP per capita of less than $50/day, would the summary statistics be the same?

    The graph is bimodal with one peak at 2500 - 5000 bin and the second is between the 12500 - 15000 bin. This shows that there is a divide between the wealthier countries and the poorer countries. The median of the data is 4785.331 while the mean is 7031.317, so median < mean hence the graph is positively skewed.

    If were we to received a different set of countries, the summary statistics would change since stats are showing the estimations for a population from a sample.

2. We want to explore the association between under_5 mortality and GDP per capita for lower than median income countries. What kind of a graph can give us an insight into the nature of this relationship? Based on this graph, are under_5 mortality and GDP per capita positively or negatively correlated? Is their relationship linear?

    A scatter plot would be the best graph to explore the association between under_5 mortality rates vs GDPPC. Under_5 mortality and GDP per capita are negatively correlated since a higher mortality rate tends to correlate with a low GDPPC.

## Question 2

1. Plot the WAGE series (plotting a time series means producing a line plot of the series in which the x-axis is time. In EViews, clicking on a series opens a window that shows the value of the series in a spreadsheet. This window has a menu bar. Under View is Graph. And the default for Graph is a line plot). What can we learn from this plot? (Note that this is a wage index with average hourly wage in 2008-2009 financial year normalised to 100. So, the numbers are proportional to hourly wage, but are not the dollar values).

    The wage index is positively correlated with the date. The data also appears to be a linear as depicted by the minimal variation from a straight line.

2. If we were interested in forecasting hourly wage index in the next period, would sample average be a good forecast? Suggest more appropriate forecasts.

    A sample average would not be a good forecasting method since it would assume that the data has no trend and that the average remains constant through out. Instead extrapolation could be used by utlising a linear regression model. 

3. In most financial or economic time series, trend is so dominant that it is the only thing that we can immediately see and all other aspects of the time series are dwarfed by its trend. To see other aspects of the series we have to remove its trend. One way is to make a model with time as an explanatory variable (we will do this later in the course). Another way is to compute the growth rate, in this case $g_t = 100 \times \frac{wage_t - wage_{t-1}}{wage_{t-1}}$ (multiplication by 100 is just to express it in percentage points). A more prevalent way of calculating the growth rate, in particular in finance, is to use what is known as "log-returns"

$$g_t = 100 \times \Delta \log(wage_t) = 100 \times (\log(wage_t) - \log(wage_{t-1}))$$

These two methods of calculating the growth rate produce values that are close to each other as long as growth rate is less than 10% in absolute value. EView has a built in function 'dLog(X)' that computes the difference of logarithm of X. Generate the growth rate of hourly wage using the log-returns formula. Open this series. Why is the first value of this series NA?
